---
layout: post
title:  "Massive Open Online Course"
date:   2014-08-01 23:30:29
categories: mooc
---

# Massive Open Online Course

## Introduction

A massive open online course (MOOC) is an online course aimed at unlimited participation and open access via the web. In addition to traditional course materials such as videos, readings, and problem sets, MOOCs provide interactive user forums that help build a community for students, professors, and teaching assistants (TAs). MOOCs are a recent development in distance education which began to emerge in 2012.

## Perspective 

* MOOCs already deliver great value to universities today [article](http://mackinstitute.wpengine.netdna-cdn.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Terwiesch_Ulrich_Threat-and-Opportunity-of-MOOCs-for-MBA-Programs.pdf).

>...Table 4 shows that the cost per enrolled students is about $0.56. If one considers that business schools may pay $1 or more to Google for a click on an AdWords ad, this can be thought of as **very inexpensive advertising**. Even if one only counts the students who complete a course, the cost per completed course is about $11 per student, still a **factor of 100 improvement** in productivity relative to the cost of instruction in the conventional MBA program.


>...Consider MOOCs as an alternative brand-building mechanism for the general public. A population that can be served at relatively low cost with SuperText is the general public. MOOCs provide business schools with ways of reaching an enormous audience, attracting applications, increasing yield, or increasing prestige. As we have seen, MOOCs allow schools to reach individuals at very low cost. While we do not know the exact cause, applications at the University of Pennsylvania **rose an amazing 15 percent** in 2014, the first year following the launch of our Coursera offerings.

>...Spending pennies per enrolled student, the MOOC is an efficient mechanism to build reputation. Instead of relying on scholarly research to support the brand of the school, MOOCs can showcase the quality of the faculty directly. Based on our previous cost estimates, we observe that **a single A journal article (at a cost of $400,000) is enough to pay for the development of about six MOOCs**.

* MOOCs are already beginning to change how universities think about the importance of teaching at their institution [article](http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/06/17/ohio-state-u-scholar-finds-path-tenure-track-moocs).

 >...When Jim Fowler becomes an assistant professor of mathematics at Ohio State University this fall, he can thank his massive open online courses -- and former president E. Gordon Gee.
 

>...In almost two years, Fowler’s now three MOOCs have run six times, and Ohio State uses his content in flipped and fully online courses for its own students. **Local high schools have used the materials to supplement their own math education. Even Fowler’s colleagues in English, engineering and statistics have found uses for his coding**.

* MOOCs are expanding the [reach](http://blogs.hbr.org/2014/06/moocs-wont-replace-business-schools-theyll-diversify-them/) of the great universities in the world.

>...Even in their infancy, business MOOCs from Wharton are reaching groups of students most commonly targeted for outreach by business schools: **working professionals outside the United States as well as foreign-born and underrepresented minorities in the United States**.

* An [article](http://www.rti.org/pubs/duke_handbook-final-03252014.pdf) on the potential for MOOCs from the perspective of employers

>...Among those who had heard of MOOCs, some 72 percent had used, considered using, or could see their company **using MOOCs for recruitment**.



>...About three-quarters of organizations viewed MOOCs very positively or positively (73 percent) with respect to their **potential influence in hiring decisions** for job applicants who had taken job-related MOOCs. **Positive views were even more frequent among those who had already heard of MOOCs**.

>...More than three-quarters of organizations had used (7 percent), considered using (5 percent), or could see their companies using MOOCs (71 percent) for employees’ professional development.

* An [article](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/19/opinion/friedman-breakfast-before-the-mooc.html?_r=0) discussing how education bridges gaps in the Middle East

>...If you had any doubts about the hunger for education in the Middle East today, Haick’s MOOC will dispel them. So far, there are about 4,800 registrations for the Arabic version, including students from Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait, Algeria, Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates and the West Bank. Iranians are signing up for the English version. **Because the registration is through the Coursera MOOC website, some registrants initially don’t realize the course is being taught by an Israeli Arab scientist at the Technion, said Haick, and when they do, some professors and students “unregister.” But most others are sticking with it**.

>...For me, though, Haick’s MOOC is also a reminder of what an utter waste of money and human talent has been the Arab-Israeli conflict. **Look how eager all these young Arabs and Persians are for the tools and resources to realize their full potential, wherever they can find that learning**.

* An [article](http://www.cnbc.com/id/101415252) on corporate training

>...Online courses trim a bill that runs to **$130 billion annually** for job training and certification, according to a report by Bersin, a unit of Deloitte Consulting.

>...Yahoo! employees can take any classes from Coursera's "Signature Track"—not even limited only to specific job function edification—from macroeconomic principles to genetics and evolution. **Yahoo! employees can be reimbursed for the cost, around $30 to $100 per course**.

>...Businesses spend **$1,195 on average per employee for training each year**, according to a report by the American Society for Training & Development.

* The story of Daniel Bergmann, an autistic teenager whose life was changed by an online poetry course.

>...There were, after all, 36,000 people enrolled in the class. Yet one student, a 17-year-old from New York named Daniel Bergmann, stood out. Not only because of the quality of his academic work (an essay Bergmann wrote on the poem “I taste a liquor never brewed” by Emily Dickinson is what first caught Filreis’ eye). **But also because Bergmann is autistic, and he credits the Coursera class with helping him emerge from the isolation of his condition** to become an active participant in the 10-week course on contemporary American poetry.

>...Nonetheless, he had **never written an essay** before taking the Modern Poetry class. In fact, the Coursera course was the first “real class” Bergmann had ever taken, and the **first time he had spoken words aloud in a classroom setting**.

>...Of the many thousands of student essays Filreis could have commented upon, he chose to respond to Bergmann’s. The young man was excited and heartened to get feedback from Filreis, **recognizing that it meant he could contribute to the class like any other student and not be defined by his autism**.

* The [Day of Compassion](http://www.socialpsychology.org/awards/day-of-compassion/2013/) assignment in Wesleyan's Social Psychology course showed how MOOCs could have direct impact on communities

>...The final assignment of the course, "The Day of Compassion," asked students to **live 24 hours as compassionately as possible and to analyze the experience using social psychology**. Roughly 700 students received a perfect score on the assignment, and the class then voted on which of these students deserved a Day of Compassion Award generously sponsored by the Stanford University Center for Compassion and Altruism Research and Education (CCARE).

>...Balesh Jindal, a physician and artist who lives in a rural area near New Delhi, India, won the grand prize for finding a way to address the problem of sexual violence toward girls in her community. During the Day of Compassion, Balesh visited a local school that has more than 2,000 female students ranging from 4 to 17 years old and belonging to a relatively low socioeconomic class. The school divided students by age into five groups of 350-400 girls, and **Balesh taught each group about inappropriate touching and how to report incidents of abuse**. These talks uncovered **multiple cases of abuse** by neighbors, brothers, cousins, and even fathers. After the Day of Compassion, Balesh invited the mothers of abused girls to her nearby clinic for free counseling, and she decided to **set aside one day each week to help these girls and to work on reducing child sexual abuse.**

>...After nine years living abroad, Stephanie Jalube happened to be visiting her home country of Colombia on the Day of Compassion, and she decided to visit an old family friend whom she regarded as an uncle. She had heard that the friend was depressed and lonely, so she thought that a visit might cheer him up. As soon as she saw him, though, it was clear that things were much worse than she imagined. Stephanie then took him out to eat and told him how happy she was to see him again. They talked at length about his troubles, and **she used social psychology principles to instill hope and persuade him that life could be beautiful**. What she didn't realize when she stopped by his house to visit was that he was about to commit suicide. He called Stephanie the next day to say that without knowing it, her act of compassion had **prevented him from taking his life**.

>...Samih Abed Uthaib is an Iraqi physician who began his Day of Compassion by holding a clown party in the pediatric cancer center where he works. He and others dressed up as clowns, danced and sang, and gave the children gifts to lift their spirits and sense of hope. Upon returning home later, he learned that his own children were sad because a girl in their neighborhood was being forced to drop out of school due to her father losing his job. Samih then met with the parents and **decided to pay the 800,000 Iraqi dinars (around $700) in school fees needed to let the girl continue her education**. He also phoned the head of staff in his hospital and **found part-time work for the girl's father**. Although the day was exhausting, he reported that it made him happy and changed him forever. In his words: "It made me a different person. As a doctor, I practice compassion and empathy everyday, but this day was different."

>...Nataliya Zubar works for a Ukrainian non-governmental organization that helps people whose civil rights are violated, so she is used to helping other people. On the Day of Compassion, she took this willingness to help a step further when she wore a prominent sign that said "Need help? Ask me!" and walked along a crowded street in the city where she lives. She also printed and distributed a flyer inviting others to practice compassion, and she gave a copy to everyone who asked what she was doing. All told, Nataliya **distributed 152 flyers and talked with 22 strangers about their problems**, often just listening and suggesting ways to obtain further assistance. The reactions people had were very positive, and one person even called Nataliya the next day to say that she had **saved his marriage**

* [Q&A](http://www.bizedmagazine.com/features/articles/what-makes-a-mooc.asp) with 3 professors who have taught MOOCs

>...In the 1990s, I once had a conversation with Jeff Bezos of Amazon.com, and we wondered whether bookstores would die out one day. A couple of years later, we knew that was exactly what was happening, but no one was willing to admit it because it sounded too evil. As business professors, we see innovation happen in industries all the time. This time it's happening in our own. **I think we know exactly where this is heading, but we don't want to say it right now**. This is a disruptive technology, and some people are going to lose.

>...But when the automobile came around, we didn't cry for the horse cart. If professors continue to reinvent what they teach and stay experiential, there will always be work. **It would be incredibly naive to believe that we can continue to do business as usual, as if MOOCs hadn't come along. This is not a crazy trend that will stick around for a year and then go away. It's here to stay**

* [Retention and Intention in Massive Open Online Courses: In Depth](http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/retention-and-intention-massive-open-online-courses-depth-0)

## Reference

* [Mooc List](http://www.mooc-list.com/)

* [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/)

* [网易公开课](http://open.163.com/)

* [麦子学院](http://www.maiziedu.com/): IT在线培训

* [MOOC学院](http://mooc.guokr.com/)

* [开课吧](http://www.kaikeba.com/) [度娘课程](http://www.kaikeba.com/courses/34)

* [小象学院](http://www.chinahadoop.cn/): 大数据收费课程

* [慕课网](http://www.imooc.com/): 互联网技能教育