---
layout: post
title:  "Notes of system paper reading"
date:   2014-09-28 20:30:29
categories: code
---

# Notes of system paper reading

## Themes

-------------

### NoSQL

List current NoSQL systems. These are fashionable, obviously directly relevant, and they hit almost all of the standard data-management and distributed-system problems. There are a lot of such systems now, and most solve the problems in very different ways (with very different levels of sophistication). There are a lot of entertaining reports from industry about failures. And there’s a lot of b.s. claims flying around about them too.

Topic | Comments | Links
------------ | ------------- | ------------
**MongoDB** | MongoDB (from "humongous") is an open source, scalable, high-performance, schema-free, document-oriented database written in the C++ programming language. The database is document-oriented so that unlike a relational database management system, it manages collections of JSON-like documents. This allows many applications to model data in a more natural way, as data can be nested in complex hierarchies and still be query-able and indexable.  | [Introduction](http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Introduction)
**Cassandra** | The Apache Cassandra Project develops a highly scalable second-generation distributed database, bringing together Dynamo's fully distributed design and Bigtable's ColumnFamily-based data model.  | [paper](http://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/.../papers/lakshman-ladis2009.pdf)
**MemBase** | Membase is a distributed key-value database management system, optimized for storing data behind interactive web applications. Membase automatically spreads data and I/O across servers. This "scale out" approach at the data layer permits virtually unlimited growth of transaction capacity, with linear increases in cost and constant per-operation performance.| [Intro](http://wiki.membase.org/display/membase/Introduction+to+Membase)
**CouchDB** |Apache CouchDB is a document-oriented database that can be queried and indexed in a MapReduce fashion using JavaScript. CouchDB also offers incremental replication with bi-directional conflict detection and resolution. | [Project](http://couchdb.apache.org/docs/index.html)
**HBase** |HBase is an open-source, distributed, versioned, column-oriented store modeled after Google' Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for Structured Data by Chang et al. Just as Bigtable leverages the distributed data storage provided by the Google File System, HBase provides Bigtable-like capabilities on top of Hadoop. | [Project](http://wiki.apache.org/hadoop/Hbase)
**Voldemort** | Voldemort is not a relational database, it does not attempt to satisfy arbitrary relations while satisfying ACID properties. Nor is it an object database that attempts to transparently map object reference graphs. Nor does it introduce a new abstraction such as document-orientation. It is basically just a big, distributed, persistent, fault-tolerant hash table. For applications that can use an O/R mapper like active-record or hibernate this will provide horizontal scalability and much higher availability but at great loss of convenience.| [Project](http://project-voldemort.com/)
**Hibari** |Hibari is a production-ready, distributed, key-value, big data store. Hibari uses chain replication for strong consistency, high-availability, and durability. Hibari has excellent performance especially for read and large value operations.. | [Project](http://hibari.sourceforge.net/)
**Riak** | Riak is a Dynamo-inspired key/value store that scales predictably and easily. Riak also simplifies development by giving developers the ability to quickly prototype, test, and deploy their applications. A truly fault-tolerant system, Riak has no single point of failure. No machines are special or central in Riak, so developers and operations professionals can decide exactly how fault-tolerant they want and need their applications to be.| [Project](https://wiki.basho.com/display/RIAK/Riak)
**Redis** | Redis is an advanced key-value store. It is similar to memcached but the dataset is not volatile, and values can be strings, exactly like in memcached, but also lists, sets, and ordered sets. All this data types can be manipulated with atomic operations to push/pop elements, add/remove elements, perform server side union, intersection, difference between sets, and so forth. Redis supports different kind of sorting abilities.| [Project](http://code.google.com/p/redis/)
**Dynamo** |Dynamo is internal technology developed at Amazon to address the need for an incrementally scalable, highly-available key-value storage system. The technology is designed to give its users the ability to trade-off cost, consistency, durability and performance, while maintaining high-availability. | [Paper](http://www.allthingsdistributed.com/files/amazon-dynamo-sosp2007.pdf)

### large scale distributed systems

Topic | Comments | Links
------------ | ------------- | ------------
**The CAP theorem** | When designing distributed web services, there are three properties that are commonly desired: consistency, availability, and partition tolerance. It is impossible to achieve all three. In this note, we prove this conjecture in the asynchronous network model, and then discuss solutions to this dilemma in the partially synchronous model. | [paper](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.20.1495&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
**On Designing and Deploying Internet-Scale Services** |The system-to-administrator ratio is commonly used as a rough metric to understand adminis- trative costs in high-scale services. With smaller, less automated services this ratio can be as low as 2:1, whereas on industry leading, highly automated services, we’ve seen ratios as high as 2,500:1. Within Microsoft services, Autopilot is often cited as the magic behind the success of the Win- dows Live Search team in achieving high system-to-administrator ratios. While auto-administration is important, the most important factor is actually the service itself. Is the service efficient to auto- mate? Is it what we refer to more generally as operations-friendly? Services that are operations- friendly require little human intervention, and both detect and recover from all but the most obscure failures without administrative intervention. This paper summarizes the best practices accumulated over many years in scaling some of the largest services at MSN and Windows Live..| [paper](http://www.mvdirona.com/jrh/talksAndPapers/JamesRH_Lisa.pdf)
**Benchmarking Cloud Serving Systems with YCSB** | While the use of MapReduce systems (such as Hadoop) for large scale data analysis has been widely recognized and studied, we have recently seen an explosion in the number of systems developed for cloud data serving. These newer systems address “cloud OLTP” applications, though they typically do not support ACID transactions. Examples of systems proposed for cloud serving use include BigTable, PNUTS, Cassandra, HBase, Azure, CouchDB, SimpleDB, Voldemort, and many others. Further, they are being ap- plied to a diverse range of applications that differ consider- ably from traditional (e.g., TPC-C like) serving workloads. The number of emerging cloud serving systems and the wide range of proposed applications, coupled with a lack of apples- to-apples performance comparisons, makes it difficult to un- derstand the tradeoffs between systems and the workloads for which they are suited. We present the Yahoo! Cloud Serving Benchmark (YCSB) framework, with the goal of fa- cilitating performance comparisons of the new generation of cloud data serving systems. We define a core set of benchmarks and report results for four widely used systems: Cassandra, HBase, Yahoo!’s PNUTS, and a simple sharded MySQL implementation. We also hope to foster the devel- opment of additional cloud benchmark suites that represent other classes of applications by making our benchmark tool available via open source. In this regard, a key feature of the YCSB framework/tool is that it is extensible—it supports easy definition of new workloads, in addition to making it easy to benchmark new systems.. | [paper](http://research.yahoo.com/files/ycsb.pdf)

### Cache

### Monitoring
